



Network Working Group                                          T. Jensen
Internet-Draft                                                          
Intended status: Standards Track                              D. Redekop
Expires: 7 January 2026                               Adam Networks Inc.
                                                                 J. Todd
                                                                   Quad9
                                                             6 July 2025


                Associated IP Prefixes for Domain Names
           draft-tdj-dnsop-associated-prefixes-for-domains-00

Abstract

   RFC9000 defines a mechanism that allows servers to migrate clients to
   another IP address without name resolution.  The new address may not
   be discoverable as A/AAAA records for that domain name.  This draft
   defines a mechanism that allows a client to get advance notice of
   associated IP addresses for a domain name as part of the DNS query.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 7 January 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Conventions and Definitions
   2.  Introduction
   3.  Terminology
   4.  Mechanism
     4.1.  CIDRS record format
       4.1.1.  Wire format
       4.1.2.  Zone file format
       4.1.3.  Justification for new RR type
       4.1.4.  Verification
   5.  Security Considerations
     5.1.  Suspiciously large IP address sets
     5.2.  Large payload sizes
   6.  Operational Considerations
     6.1.  TTLs for SVCB and CIDRS records
     6.2.  Complex messages
     6.3.  Transition period workarounds
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  References
     9.1.  Normative References
     9.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  Introduction

   It is common for services to be associated with domain names even if
   not every IP address used by the service are represented in A and
   AAAA records for the service's domain names.  One example is
   teleconferencing, which often uses a media streaming protocol whose
   peer addresses are negotiated within a connection, such as the use of
   WebRTC.  Another is QUIC's use of preferred addresses, defined in
   Section 9.6 of [RFC9000], which allows a server to migrate a client
   to another server IP address which may or may not have been
   resolvable from the domain name resolved to initiate the original
   connection.

   This document defines a mechanism for domain name owners to advertise
   any IP address prefixes that are associated with a domain name.  This
   allows client peers to predict which IP addresses may end up in use
   when contacting a given service.

3.  Terminology

   TBD

4.  Mechanism

   When a client wishes to discover the IP prefixes that are associated
   with a given domain name, it SHOULD issue a SVCB query for the domain
   name (which it may already be doing for other reasons).  If the
   "cidrs" key is present, then it SHOULD issue another query of type
   CIDRS to retrieve the associated IP prefixes.

   When a server wishes to provide the associated IP prefixes for a
   given name, it SHOULD create CIDRS records as well as a SVCB record
   with the "cidrs" key set.  While the mechanism is simple, the
   Operational Considerations section contains further normative
   implementation guidance.

4.1.  CIDRS record format

   The CIDRS RR type is designed to convey an IP prefix, an associated
   port range, and a protocol number as defined in the Assigned Internet
   Protocol Numbers IANA registry.  The port range can be defined as
   0-65535 and the protocol number as 255 if these fields are not
   applicable for the record owner (because only the IP prefix is
   interesting).

4.1.1.  Wire format

   CIDRS RR data on the wire uses the following format (TODO: ASCII art
   of the fields below):

   *  IP family (4 bits): indicates which version of the Internet
      Protocol the prefix belongs to

   *  Reserved for future use (4 bits)

   *  Length of Prefix (8 bits): number of bits of the IP prefix.

   *  Prefix (ceil(Length of Prefix / 8) bytes): the IP prefix itself.
      The length of this field is always an integer of bytes (begins and
      ends on octent boundaries) just large enough to contain a prefix
      of length equal to the Length of Prefix

   *  Port Range Begin (16 bits): the lowest port number in the included
      range

   *  Port Range End (16 bits): the highest port number in the included
      range

   *  Protocol Number (8 bits): a value from the Assigned Internet
      Protocol Numbers IANA registry (255 if no associated protocol
      should be defined)

4.1.2.  Zone file format

   TODO: will do after the idea survives initial contact with the WG

4.1.3.  Justification for new RR type

   Because the list of associated IP addresses for a given name is
   likely to be somewhat large, at least relative to the typical A,
   AAAA, and SVCB/HTTPS queries a client is likely to make, it makes
   sense to create a new type that ensures DNS query issuers can opt
   into receiving this payload.  Additionally, inclusion within SVCB or
   HTTPS records is a dubious reuse given there is no guarantee that
   services at associated IP addresses can authenticate a name (if the
   resulting protocol does not perform name verification).

4.1.4.  Verification

   CIDRS records MUST be DNSSEC signed.  This is because unlike A and
   AAAA records, there is no expectation that the resulting traffic the
   querying client will send to these IP addresses will be able to
   prevent attacker impersonation via secure peer validation such as
   that provided by TLS certificates.  By definition, the addresses in
   these CIDRs are used in association with services that use the domain
   name but cannot validate claims of the domain name.  DNSSEC
   validation will provide assurance that the IP addresses are those
   expected by the valid owner of the domain name.

5.  Security Considerations

5.1.  Suspiciously large IP address sets

   Servers SHOULD avoid claiming very short prefixes in CIDRS records.
   It is not expected that a single domain name is legitimately
   associated with a short prefix.  Clients MAY choose to ignore claims
   of association by CIDRS records with prefixes shorter than a
   preconfigured minimum length per IP version.  This version of the
   text does not suggest defined values for minimum prefix lengths,
   though as a reasonable rule of thumb, domain name owners SHOULD NOT
   have prefixes in CIDRS records that include multiple ASNs to avoid
   clients considering their prefixes to be too short.

   Note that associated IP addresses SHOULD be restricted to IP
   addresses which a server reasonably expects a client will need to
   interact with the functionality provided by the service which uses
   the domain name.  For example, name owners SHOULD NOT create CIDRS
   records that include all IP ranges owned by a company for the
   company's primarily recognizable domain name (example-
   company.example. having a CIDRS record listing every IP address owned
   by Example Company would be inappropriate).

5.2.  Large payload sizes

   It is expected that in most common use cases, CIDRS records will need
   more than one CIDR value, possibly many (balancing this against
   guidance given in Section 6.2).  Servers SHOULD truncate responses to
   avoid creating risk of effective DDoS attacks, even if the CIDRS
   record would fit in a single UDP packet.  This means in effect that
   CIDRS records SHOULD NOT ever be sent using unencrypted DNS over UDP.

6.  Operational Considerations

6.1.  TTLs for SVCB and CIDRS records

   Servers SHOULD NOT have a TTL value for SVCB records containing the
   "%%%%%%%%%" key that are less than the TTL values for CIDRS records
   for the same domain name.  This would cause the client to re-check
   for the presence of CIDRS records that it will still have cached.

   The TTL values of CIDRS records SHOULD NOT be any shorter than the
   expected lifetime of traffic flows of typical service usage.  Doing
   so would encourage DNS stub resolvers and the processes calling DNS
   sutb resolver APIs to ignore TTL values in favor of supporting
   performant user experiences.

6.2.  Complex messages

   [RFC3123] defines an experimental mechanism by which the APL RR type
   can both define CIDRs that are somehow associated with a domain name
   as well as negate subsets of the CIDR.  This is specifically not
   supported for the CIDRS RR type because of the added complexity this
   creates for implementors and the support for defining non-consecutive
   subnets for the same purpose.  Implementors SHOULD reduce the number
   of CIDRs needed for a given domain name rather than have many long
   prefixes that cannot be grouped under fewer CIDRs without needing to
   define the non-included gaps within them.

6.3.  Transition period workarounds

   Before deployment of this document is common, clients will frequently
   run into the problem of wanting to discover associated IP addresses
   for a given zone, but the zone owner does not yet support this
   document.  During this ramp up of deployment, administrators might
   turn to workarounds, such as creating a zone they control to
   distribute CIDRs the administrator knows to be associated with
   services they depend on but do not yet support this document.

   How to accomplish such a mapping is left to implementors as a non-
   standard mechanism.  This is out of scope for this document, which
   only defines advertisement of IP addresses associated with a given
   name directly.

   {closing}

7.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

8.  IANA Considerations

   TODO: new DNS RR type "CIDRS"

   TODO: new SVCB key "cidrs"

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3123]  Koch, P., "A DNS RR Type for Lists of Address Prefixes
              (APL RR)", RFC 3123, DOI 10.17487/RFC3123, June 2001,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3123>.

   [RFC9000]  Iyengar, J., Ed. and M. Thomson, Ed., "QUIC: A UDP-Based
              Multiplexed and Secure Transport", RFC 9000,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9000, May 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9000>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Tommy Jensen
   Email: tojens.ietf@gmail.com


   David Redekop
   Adam Networks Inc.
   Email: david.ietf@adamnet.works


   John Todd
   Quad9
   Email: jtodd@quad9.net
